---
layout: post
title:  "Cross Platform Music Management App"
date:   2014-08-27 13:21
tags: music nodejs node-webkit
---

A while back I made the decision to switch to [ArchBang](http://wiki.archbang.org/) for my desktop environment at work. I think ArchBang is a great linux distro. It's based on Arch Linux, which gives you a *very* basic linux distro; by basic, I mean no GUI, no network packages, nothing. ArchBang sets the starting point a little bit higher. When you boot the first time, you get a desktop environment.

Anyhow. After making the switch, I started looking around for all the various components I'd need on my desktop. Over time, I got most of the applications I wanted, and I got almost everything configured how I liked it. (Perhaps at some point I'll make a blog post listing out what these various applications and configs are.) However, the one thing I couldn't find was a good music management application.

Coming from MediaMonkey on Windows, I'm a bit picky when it comes to my music management. The program has to be able to read and edit ID3 tags, preferably in multiple formats, but at least in MP3. It also has to give me options of how I'd like to see the data (customizable column view, album view, hierarchical, etc). I wanted it to be skinnable, and extendable with plugins. I also wanted it to be open source, and in a language I was comfortable contributing to (no C/C++; ick...).

I found a couple decent programs. I won't bother listing them out here, but my favorite was QuodLibet. The problems I had with it were: it wasn't customizable enough, it wasn't hosted on github (minor annoyance), and it was written in Python (which I will be learning soon, but don't know yet).

So, I decided to create my own music management application that met all of the above criteria and much more. Of course, I hadn't every created a desktop application before, so I didn't really know where to begin. I started by looking into various technologies for creating cross-platform destkop apps. I found [this page](http://clintberry.com/2013/html5-apps-desktop-2013/), which gave a very helpful overview. First, I looked into TideSDK, but it didn't have any recent development. I also looked into Shoes, since I'm quite comfortable with Ruby, but it seemed too basic for me. I looked into gtk-based libraries, but that seemed too involved.

Finally, I decided on [node-webkit](https://github.com/rogerwang/node-webkit). It's basically Chromium + NodeJS in a nice little bundle. You create your apps in NodeJS and HTML/CSS, and you can use many existing libraries. When you're ready to package and release your application, you basically create a zip file with the NW executable included, and distrubute that. No compiling. No linking. Pain-free.

I'm currently working through the development of this application, and I hope to have a beta version released later this year, assuming I have enough time during the semester for my own projects on top of school work. For more info on this project, see [the github repo](https://github.com/oddityoverseer13/musicjs).
