---
layout: post
title:  "Programming for the Layman"
date:   2015-04-04 11:00:00
tags: computing layman programming
---

Recently, there has been a fair amount of discussion about the lack of basic
programming knowledge the average person has. Most of the people I've talked
to, who don't work in the industry, seem to be of the opinion that programming
is difficult, and beyond the common person's abilities. Normally, they're not
interested in trying because they view it as something "tech people" do.

In my opinion, that's simply wrong. Once you understand the very basics,
programming is not very difficult. It's also applicable to many fields other
than software development. For example, many people would benefit from having
their own website. It's great for showing off your work experience, projects,
photography, and activities. Of course, there's frameworks out there for
building websites, where you don't need to touch a line of code, but at that
point, you lose most of the customizability you have when you design it
yourself.

Even if you do assume programming is only for software developers, I still
think more people should give it a try. The job market for the computing
industry is booming right now. [According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics](
http://www.bls.gov/ooh/computer-and-information-technology/software-developers.htm),
employment of software developers is expected to in increase around 22%
between 2012 and 2022. The best part about that, is you don't need a college
degree to get started. There are [many](http://www.codecademy.com/)
[great](http://www.lynda.com/) [sites](http://www.w3schools.com/)
[online](http://www.code.org/). All you realy need is a computer, and a will to
learn.

There are many other reasons that programming knowledge is valuable to the
average person, but a last one that I would like to highlight is that
programming is founded in logical thinking. So, by programming, you hone your
logic and critical thinking skills, which apply to almost any field you go
into.

In order to open programming up to a wider audience, I believe exposure to it
should start earlier than it does now. I, personally, wasn't exposed to a
single line of code until a few years into college. Some people I've talked to
had classes in high school that taught them basic programming skills. However,
I don't believe that's commonplace, but it should be.

I believe exposure to programming should start as early as high school or even
middle school. Some people have even proposed radical ideas like adding
programming to the list of core classes, alongside math, science, language
arts, and social studies. I think that's overkill. Core classes should provide
everyone with skills that they will almost necessarily use later in their
career or education, and therefore, are applicable to all professions.

Not everyone needs to know how to program, but I do believe everyone should
have the opportunity to try it. A range of computer science classes should be
available as electives, including web design, scripting, and mobile app
development. The more chances kids have to try different things, the easier
they can make informed decisions about what they want to do after school.

Alright, so we need to educate more youth about computers. The next
question is: *what should they be taught?*

Well, much like other fields, computing is constantly changing. Moore's law
tells us that computing power doubles every two years. Assuming that trend
continues, in a few years, we will be able to do things that were not even
dreamed of a few years ago. Even if computing *power* doesn't increase,
programming practices will most certainly change. Languages and technologies
that were common place five or ten years ago are very outdated today. The
technologies being used today will be outdated before too long.

In such a constantly changing environment, the specifics of each language
should be emphasized less. You don't need to know how to do various things in
each language. More important are the fundamental ideas behind all computing;
things like how the hardware works, what control flow statements
(for,if/else,while,etc) do, and how to use various data structures
efficiently.

However, that doesn't mean no specifics should be taught. To the contrary, I
think the only way to really teach the fundamental concepts of programming and
computing are through real-world examples. That means teachers need to keep up
with current trends and write their lessons around them.

I look forward to the future of computing education. I am confident it will
continue to spread and improve. By gaining an understanding of how software
works, you gain many valuable skills. Not only do you better understand how
software works, but you also learn logical thinking, better security
practices, and an understanding of the capabilities and limitations of
software.
